

                    HISTORY OF AIRES SIMULATION SYSTEM.

***

12/Dec/2006 AIRES version 2.8.4a (about 730 routines and more than 101,000
----------- lines of source code).
            Functionally equivalent to AIRES 2.8.4. A minor modification in
the installation procedure with gfortran compiler is included, together with
technical bug fixes.

09/Oct/2006 AIRES version 2.8.4 (about 730 routines and more than 101,000
----------- lines of source code).
            Some differences with the previous version:
            1) Hadronic model QGSJETII-3
            2) Several bug fixes.
In all other aspects AIRES 2.8.4 is similar to AIRES 2.8.2a.

13/Dec/2005 AIRES version 2.8.2a (about 730 routines and more than 101,000
----------- lines of source code).
            A bug in the AIRES-QGSJET-II link routines has been fixed
(Affecting only showers initiated by primary nuclei).
In all other aspects AIRES 2.8.2a is similar to AIRES 2.8.2.

01/Nov/2005 AIRES version 2.8.2 (about 730 routines and more than 101,000
----------- lines of source code).
            Some differences with the previous version:
   (1) A link for QGSJET-II (beta version) is provided. A special executable
   "AiresQIIbeta" is generated during the installation process.
   (2) The default QGSJET model (executable "AiresQ") is QGSJET01c.
   (3) Geomagnetic field is calculated using the new IGRF10 model.
   (4) A few new additions to the Aires library (pending documentation!).
   (5) As always, numerous minor bugs have been fixed.

23/Mar/2005 AIRES version 2.8.0 (about 725 routines and 101,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Some differences with the previous version:
   (1) SIBYLL 1.6 and QGSJET 99 are no longer included as hadronic model
   options.
   (2) A "no thinning" option for compiling the simulations programs is
   included.
   (3) A new program, AiresMerge, to merge the data contained in more than
   one IDF or ADF file is included.
   (4) Added numerous IDL instructions and library routines. Documentation
   of new features is missing.
   (5) Support for dynamically added fields to compressed file records.
   (6) As always, numerous minor bugs have been fixed.

11/Jul/2002 AIRES version 2.6.0 (about 670 routines and 94,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Differences with the previous version:
   (1) New version of SIBYLL (SIBYLL 2.1) hadronic model.
   (2) New version of QGSJET (QGSJET01) hadronic model.
   (3) Nucleus-nucleus cross sections and nuclear fragmentation are now
   processed via the external hadronic packages (SIBYLL or QGSJET).
   (4) The algorithm saving ground particles into compressed files were
   improved to exactly account the arrival times of heavy neutral particles
   like neutrons.
   (5) Nuclear codes were extended beyond iron, up to Z = 36.
   (6) The simulation and summary programs can generate a task summary script
   file (extension .tss) containing the most relevant data associated with the
   simulations, in the format Keyword = value, suitable for processing by other
   programs.
   (7) Complete revision of the AIRES Runner System, focused on improving the
   capacity of the System to cope with large scale computations.
   (8) The AIRES runner scripts now support the inclusion of BeforeProcess
   macro.
   (9) New modules added to the AIRES object library, in particular some
   routines for easier processing of longitudinal particle tracking files.
   (10) Revision of the user's manual and inclusion of several issues
   that were introduced at the previous release of AIRES with pending
   documentation.
   (11) Additionally, several minor changes, improvements, and -of course-
   corrections of bugs!

19/Oct/2001 AIRES version 2.4.0 (about 620 routines and 88,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Differences with the previous version:
   (1) New version of the splitting algorithm used to process low energy
   hadronic interactions. This new version was tuned to effectively
   emulate well-known interaction models.
   (2) Low energy cross sections are now evaluated using fits to experimental
   data.
   (3) Improved procedures for gamma-nucleus collisions.
   (4) Muon propagation now takes into account muon bremsstrahlung and
   muonic pair production. The new algorithms are based in the theory by
   Kokoulin and Petrukhin.
   (5) New improved procedure to treat knock-on electrons generated by heavy
   charged particles.
   (6) Full propagation of Lambda baryons.
   (7) Improved procedures for meson and baryon decay.
   (8) Exhaustive revision of the electromagnetic shower engine.
   (9) The thinning algorithm posseses now two maximum weight parameters,
   respectively for electromagnetic (gamma, e+, e-) and heavy particles.
   (10) New IGRF 2000 data set used to estimate geomagnetic field.
   (11) 48 new longitudinal development tables corresponding to the following
   observables: Number of low energy particles versus atmospheric depth;
   Energy of low energy particles versus atmospheric depth; deposited energy
   (ionization) versus atmospheric depth.
   (12) Improved procedure for updating idf and compressed files, that
   permits more stable operation during very long runs.
   (13) Many new modules in the AIRES library.
   (14) Global variables can be defined within the input data. Such variables
   can be used for text replacement within the input file and/or be passed
   to external analysis or special primary modules.
   (15) New length (inches, feet, yards, and miles) and energy (Joules) units
   supported. The standard "keV" replaces the old "KeV" which is maintained
   as valid for backwards compatibility.
   (16) Additionally, lots of minor changes, improvements, and -of course-
   corrections of bugs!

23/Dec/1999 AIRES version 2.2.1. Functionally equivalent to version 2.2.0.
----------- A bug in the QGSJET interface (Diffractive interactions were
            mistakenly disabled) has been fixed.

26/Nov/1999 AIRES version 2.2.0a. Functionally equivalent to version 2.2.0.
----------- A bug in the recently developed interface for processing special
            primaries has been fixed.

15/Nov/1999 AIRES version 2.2.0 (about 590 routines and 80,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Differences with the previous version:
   (1) An improved parameterization of the e+e- losses in air.
   (2) A "resampling algorithm" which selectively saves particles located near
   the shower axis, capable of reducing substantially the sizes of the
   compressed particle files.
   (3) An improvement in the algorithm to process lambda baryons generated by
   QGSJET. A related bug affecting noticeably about 1% of the showers has been
   fixed.
   (4) The AIRES kernel is now capable of invoking external, user-written,
   programs to generate sets of particles to be injected in the stacks before
   starting the simulation of the corresponding shower. This kind of primary
   particle processing, called "special primary particles" was developed for
   several purposes, for example, processing the first interaction of "exotic"
   primaries like neutrinos, including all the particles generated by
   ultra-high energy gamma ray conversion in the geomagnetic field before
   reaching the atmosphere, etc.
   (5) Upgraded version of QGSJET.
   (6) Important extension of the AIRES object library, including a series of
   utilities to process special primaries.
   (7) Additionally, lots of minor changes, improvements, and -of course-
   corrections of bugs!

06/May/1999 Relaunched version 2.0.0. Minor corrections to the user's manual.
----------- Parameters ElectronRoughCut and GammaRoughCut can be as low as
50 KeV. Corrected bug in AiresIDF2ADF.

26/Apr/1999 AIRES version 2.0.0 (about 530 routines and 75,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Differences with the previous version:
   (1) A complete set of options for the hadronic mean free paths (or cross
   sections. The user can select among Standard (or MOCCA), Bartol, QGSJET and
   SIBYLL hadronic mean free paths, independently of the external collision
   algorithm (QGSJET or SIBYLL) being used.
   (2) A more recent version of the SIBYLL package (1.6) replaces the old 1.5
   version used in previous releases of AIRES.
   (3) The propagating procedures were expanded to include full kaon and eta
   meson propagation.
   (4) The algorithms for calculation of energy losses during the longitudinal
   and ground particle recording have been noticeably improved.
   (5) The statistical thinning algorithm has been modified. The new
   procedures, identified as AIRES extended thinning algorithm, allow to put a
   strict upper bound to the maximum statistical weight that a particle entry
   can have.
   (6) The stack management procedures have been improved to make a more
   efficient use of scratch space. This produces a noticeable increase in
   the performance of the AIRES system when processing showers in extremely
   hard thinning conditions.
   (7) Longitudinal, lateral, energy and time distribution tables can now be
   saved in a "per shower" basis, allowing the user to retrieve full
   information on particular showers using the standard features of the
   summary program. This feature can be disabled when necessary.
   (8) Two new output data tables, namely, "First interaction depth and
   primary energy versus shower number" and "Zenith and azimuth angles versus
   shower number".
   (9) All the atmospheric depths appearing in the longitudinal development
   tables and/or per shower tables can now be expressed also as slant depths.
   (10) All the data generated during the simulations, which is stored in
   the (binary) internal dump file (IDF), can now be written in portable
   format into a portable (ASCII) dump file (ADF) which can be written when
   finishing a simulation task. Additionally, a converting program, 
   AiresIDF2ADF, is provided to convert any existing IDF file into ADF format.
   (11) The random number generator can now be initialized taking the seed
   from an already existent IDF file corresponding to a previous task. This is
   most useful for reproducing (bitwise) simulation jobs when necessary.
   (12) The AIRES object library was again expanded, including a series of new
   modules to ease AIRES output management.
   (13) The modules of the AIRES Runner system have been extensively revised
   and improved.
   (14) This distribution includes a new section, namely, cerntools,
   consisting of a series of PAW macros capable of dowloading AIRES output
   data directly from within this analysis program.
   (15) The installation procedure includes a new platform option: ALPHA
   workstations with Linux OS.
   (16) The compiling options for DEC ALPHA and HP workstations were
   modified to overcome some compiling and running problems that were present
   in past releases of AIRES.
   (17) Additionally, lots of minor changes, improvements, and -of course-
   corrections of bugs!

18/Aug/1998 AIRES version 1.4.2a.
----------- This version is functionally similar to version 1.4.2. The code
            incorporates corrections to some minor bugs.

18/Jun/1998 AIRES version 1.4.2 (about 450 routines and 66,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Differences with the previous version:
   (1) The User's Manual was revised and expanded. The summary and introduction
   were completely rewritten. In particular, a more precise description of the
   relation existing between AIRES and MOCCA was made.
   (2) The LPM effect algorithms were completely rewritten. The new procedures
   emulate Migdal's theory including the effect of dielectric suppression. The
   old routines were not correct (the errors were inherited from MOCCA's
   procedures), and therefore it is recommended to re-run simulations done with
   older versions of AIRES at primary energies larger than 10^18 eV.
   (3) The number of observing levels to be included in the longitudinal
   tracking particle file can be now controlated by means of IDL directives.
   (4) There are a few new routines in the AIRES library.
   (5) Added support for unweighted tables.
   (6) Fixed bug affecting the arrival time distribution under certain
   circumstances. Many thanks to Pierre Billoir and Xavier Bertou (LPNHE,
   Paris, France).
   (7) Lots of minor technical improvements in the simulation programs, AIRES
   Runner System, etc.

29/Jan/1998 AIRES version 1.4.0 (about 400 routines and 63,000 lines of
----------- source code).
            Differences with previous version:
   (1) The curvature of the earth is taken into account to evaluate particle
   paths and altitude <--> atmospheric depth conversions.
   (2) Improved lost particle algorithms. This, together whith (1) allow for
   reliable processing of non-vertical showers at all zenith angles, even the
   quasi-horizontal ones.
   (3) New compressed output files, and compressed files options: Full
   longitudinal file, and "large record" files that allow for more complete
   particle properties.
   (4) New options for printing and exporting tables: lL, allowing to get
   normalized dN/dln(.) or dN/dlog10(.) listings.
   (5) Special -non printable- characters (tabs, for example), can now be
   included within IDL directives.
   (6) More restrictive bounds for primary energy: Must be in the range
   [1 GeV, 10^23 eV], and must be greater than all the cut energies.
   (7) Both SIBYLL and Bartol MFP's are now enabled by default. The old
   defaults were SIBYLL On and Bartol Off.
   (8) The AIRES object library was substantially enlarged with new routines
   callable from analysis programs. This includes also interface routines to
   permit processing compressed files from a C environment.
   (9) Corrected minor bug in input data summary (primary energy printing).
   (10) Corrected minor bug in rounding algorithm used in floating point
   numbers encoding routines.
   (11) Fixed bug in the algorithm for counting particles during the
   longitudinal development of the shower. The bug affected particle numbers
   in runs with very high energy thresholds (1 GeV or so). Many thanks to
   Ricardo Vazquez (University of Sao Paulo, Brazil).
   (12) Fixed bug in the algorithm to set the depth of first interaction for
   showers with electron primaries. Many thanks to Pierre Billoir (LPNHE,
   Paris, France).
   (13) Fixed bug in the "All neutral particles" tables calculations. Many
   thanks to Ivone Albuquerque (U. of Chicago, USA).
   (14) Task names with underscores ("_") can now be properly processed using
   the LaTeX option (Problem pointed out by Pierre Billoir).
   (15) Added LPM effect On/Off switch.
   (16) Geomagnetic field included. The geomagnetic field can be specified
   either explicitly (given the modulus and orientation of B) or implicitly
   indicating the geographical coordinates and altitude of the site (in this
   case the IGRF model is used to evaluate the magnetic field). Fluctuations
   are supported as well.
   (17) QGSJET interaction model included. Some "approximations" had to be
   done, however: Kaons and other mesons not treated by AIRES are treated
   as pions. The nuclear fragmentation algorithm of QGSJET is not used.
   (18) Improved method to evaluate Xmax and Nmax. Now a four-parameter fit
   is used.

21/May/1997 Corrected some minor details in documentation and demo files.
-----------

30/Apr/1997 First public version of AIRES package: 1.2.0 (about 200 routines
----------- and 45,000 lines of source code).
            This version includes many features of the well-known program
   MOCCA for air shower simulation. SIBYLL external collision package is
   included. Other characteristics are: Energy longitudinal development,
   compressed particle files, brief documentation, etc.

*** *** ***

